name: title-layout
layout: true
class: left, middle, title

---
name: basic-layout
layout: true
class: left, top

---
name: title
template: title-layout

<table><tbody>
  <tr>
    <td><h1>Making C++:&nbsp;</h1></td>
    <td><h1>Easier</h1></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td><h1>Faster</h1></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td><h1>Safer</h1></td>
  </tr>
</tbody></table>
.footnote[Chandler Carruth, <chandlerc@gmail.com>, [@chandlerc1024](https://twitter.com/chandlerc1024)]

???
Intro:

---
name: at-scale
template: title-layout

# Making C++ Easier, Faster, Safer...
.right[
# *At Scale*
]

???

---
name: at-scale-users
template: basic-layout

## Scale across different dimensions
- Number of users
- Size of codebase
- *Time* &rightarrow; We're doing engineering!

???

---
name: preconclusion
template: title-layout

## 1) Live at head, build from source
## 2) Modern toolchain, modern language
## 3) Be lazy through tools

???
- answer
  - live at head, build from source
  - modern toolchain, modern language
  - being lazy scales, be lazy through tools

---
name: joke-we-done?
template: title-layout

# We're done! ;]

???
- unfortunately, answers without understanding don't help. need to understand
  *why*

---
name: live-at-head
template: title-layout

# Live at Head

.footnote[https://youtu.be/tISy7EJQPzI]

???
- live at head
  - Refer to Titus's keynote for full story
  - Let's do a very brief overview of the parts essential here

Well, this time we didn't just jump past *understanding* to get to the answer,
we bypassed the question entirely! What problem are we trying to solve here?

---
name: prob-deps-time
template: title-layout

## Problem: Updating Diamond Dependencies

???
The fundamental problem that we're trying to solve with living at head is
updating libraries.

These updates can be especially challenging when part of diamond shaped
dependency graphs. Is the update safe? What other depending libraries need to
be updated at the same time?

---
name: semver1
template: title-layout

## SemVer?

???
One of the classic approaches for resolving these issues is called "SemVer".

What deos that even mean?

---
name: semver2
template: title-layout

## .hl[Sem]antic .hl[Ver]soning

.footnote[https://semver.org/]
???
This expands to "Semantic Versioning"

---
name: semver3
template: basic-layout

## Semantic Versoning: v`X`.`Y`.`Z`
- Major version '`X`' for incompatible changes
- Minor version '`Y`' for backwards compatible new functionality
- Patch version '`Z`' for backwards compatible bug fix

???
- Tries to capture which updates may be "breaking" for different classes of
  users
- This is useful for direct consumers
- Less useful for indirect consumers - they don't care about what changed they
  care whether it will break if they update it w/o updating things directly
  depending on it
- The question of "what do I do to not break" is also useful for direct
  consumers

---
name: semver4
template: basic-layout

## Semantic Versoning: v`X`.`Y`.`Z`
- Major version '`X`' update: incompatible, need to update source
- Minor version '`Y`' update: API-compatible, need to recompile source
- Patch version '`Z`' update: ABI-compatible, no need to recompile source

???
- Some libraries follow a fairly common practice extension of SemVer.
- Better, but do these kinds of guarantees work in practice? At scale?

---
name: semver-nope
template: title-layout

# Doesn't work in practice. =/

???
In a word, no.

---
name: hyrums-law
template: title-layout

## Hyrum's Law:
> With a sufficient number of users of an API, it does not matter what you
> promise in the contract: all observable behaviors of your system will be
> depended on by somebody.
>
> <cite>[Hyrum Wright](http://www.hyrumslaw.com/)</cite>

???
- Even with the best of intentions, the compatibility guarantee won't
  actually survive

---
name: living-at-head-return
template: title-layout

## Instead, Live at Head

???
Living at head is a different approach to coping w/ this reality

---
name: living-at-head-details
template: basic-layout

## Live at Head
- Prepare for eventual incompatibility on update
- Continuously update &rightarrow; like continuous integration for dependencies
- Use unittests to detect failures rapidly
- Make changes to cope with incompatibilities
- Pressure libraries to provide upgrade tooling to automate

???
- Understand that even when unintended, there may be compatibility issues
  when upgrading
- Continuously upgrade to minimize incremental delta and make it easier to
  spot failure -> same core idea as continuous integration
- Insist on (or write some) unittests to enable you to detect failures
  rapidly (maybe even mechanically)
- Be prepared to make changes to cope w/ incompatibility (and use unittests
  to verify them despite changing code you don't "own")
- Library vendors should provide tools to automate these updates long-term

---
name: source1
template: title-layout

# Build from Source

???
- build from source
  - necessity starts from living at head
    - if you aren't building the libraries you consume from source, you can't
      necessarily use the tooling provided by Abseil or similar to update them

---
name: source2
template: title-layout

## Build *transitively* from Source

???
  - Goes beyond living at head tho
    - the C++ ecosystem is moving faster now
    - an essential component of moving with it is being able to move your
      dependencies
    - You want tools to understand them, and many tools need source to provide
      a high quality experience

---
name: source-how
template: basic-layout

## Approaches to building from source
- Monolithic git repository (use submodules if needed)
  - Use CMake or GN with Ninja as a decent build system
- [Bazel](https://bazel.build/)'s external dependencies and workspaces
  - Direct support for building dependencies from source in the build system

???
  - How?
    - It's important to find a way that works for *your* project, but here are
      ideas
    - develop a monolithic repository, and "pull" dependencies into it
      - Can just be a normal git repo
      - git scales pretty well up to reasonably sized dependency sets
      - can use submodules to keep repo size down, and still control version
    - can use something like Bazel's external dependencies to pull them
      automatically
    - etc

---
name: source-requirements
template: basic-layout

## Requirements when building from source
- Pinning dependencies to specific versions
- Cloning dependencies with local changes
  - Hopefully while upstreaming those changes so you can *un*clone them
  - Yes, this applies to closed source too!

???
- Important to retain the ability to pin at specific versions, and
  potentially clone them to make changes that haven't (yet) gone to
  upstream
- Also important to have a plan to *un* clone them at some point (you don't
  want to take over maintenance forever)

Important to note that this applies to closed source to! There is *some*
upstream, and you still have all of the same requirements!

---
name: toolchain-intro
template: title-layout

# Modern Toolchain

???
- The next critical component is a modern toolchain
- Think of your toolchain just like you would one of your libraries

---
name: toolchain-live-at-head
template: title-layout

## "Live at Head" for your toolchain

???
- Best way to manage long-term challenges with compatibility are to "live at
  head" with the toolchain as well
  - Modern toolchains increasingly focused on enabling these development
    practices
    - Warnings to help ease updates, etc.
  - Other tools are going to be predicated on a modern toolchain

---
name: toolchain-components
template: basic-layout

## What's in a toolchain anyways?
- Compiler (unsurprisingly)
- Linker
- Standard (C++) library
- Debugger
- (Sometimes) Other developer tools

???
When I'm talking about the toolchain, I at least mean the compiler and linker.
Usually this includes the standard C++ library, and usually the debugger.

---
name: toolchain-liability
template: basic-layout
exclude: true

## Legacy toolchains become a liability
- New versions of libraries will drop support
- New toolchains will force updating other libraries
- Can cause a cascade of updates, just like w/ very low level libraries

???
  - Supporting legacy toolchains will end up being a liability over time
    - you'll end up wanting to update some library you depend on to a new
      version
    - but that version won't build any more w/ older toolchains
    - can end up with a cascade of updates that become necessary but very
      expensive

---
name: toolchain-options
template: title-layout

## GCC and LLVM are both great...
.right[
## But I am biased!
]

???
I, of course, mostly recommend LLVM here.

But don't  be fooled, GCC is pretty excellent these days. Having a *modern*
toolchain is way more important than using LLVM.

Other options have more serious flaws IMO:
- Closed source (and so harder to get fixes)
- Much more limited platform support
- ...

---
name: toolchain-llvm
template: basic-layout

## LLVM Update Cadence
- Two releases a year. Minimum viable cadence.
- Increasing interest in and efforts around rolling "near head" packages
  - Available prebuilt images for GCP for [Ubuntu][1] and [Debian][2]
- Consider building from source and deploying yourself
  - See Pacific++ talk last year for details (and live demo!)

[1]: https://launcher.gcr.io/google/clang-ubuntu
[2]: https://launcher.gcr.io/google/clang-debian9

???
- If you go with LLVM and Clang, be aware of the cadence
  - Right now, two releases a year. This is basically a minimum cadence.
  - Looking at having rolling releases "near head" packaged nicely
    - Already available as prebuilt images on GCP

---
name: language
template: title-layout

# Modern Language

???
- modern language
  - Another somewhat surprising implicit dependency is the language itself
  - Want to follow "live at head" here as well

---
name: language-challenges
template: basic-layout

## Modern Language Challenges
- Slow cadence: three years
- Availability in toolchains may lag publication in practice

Committee and toolchain folks are trying to improve...

???
- Language updates happen at a slow pace: every three years
- Availability often lags the publication in practice
- However, there is some work both on the committee and in tools to try and
  address this

---
name: language-code
template: basic-layout

## Need modern language *in the code*
- Adopt new language idioms
- Use new library APIs
  - Especially vocabulary types

Can require boring, mechanical changes... Is there a better way?

???
- A key component of this strategy involves updating code to use new language
  features once they're available
  - Think about range based for loops and std::unique_ptr
- Can seem super boring and tedious.... Maybe don't use humans to do this!

---
name: lazy
template: title-layout

# Be lazy through tools!

---
name: lazy-table
template: basic-layout

## LLVM- and Clang-based tools

.left-col[
- [`clang`](http://clang.llvm.org/) itself!
- [`clang-format`](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ClangFormat.html)
- [`clang-tidy`](http://clang.llvm.org/extra/clang-tidy/)
  - Bugprone checks
  - Clang Static Analyzer based checks
  - Modernize checks
- [ClangD](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/clangd.html)
  - [Include Fixer](https://clang.llvm.org/extra/include-fixer.html)
]
.right-col[
- [Address Sanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AddressSanitizer.html)
- [Memory Sanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/MemorySanitizer.html)
- [Thread Sanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ThreadSanitizer.html)
- [Undefined Behavior Sanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer.html)
- [CFI](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/ControlFlowIntegrity.html)
- [SafeStack](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/SafeStack.html) (maybe)
- [libFuzzer](https://llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html)
- [OSS-Fuzz](https://github.com/google/oss-fuzz)
]

???

---
name: getting-there
template: title-layout

# How do you deploy all of this?

???
What if you have an existing C++ codebase? How do you deploy all of these ideas
to that codebase?

---
name: getting-there-incrementally
template: basic-layout

## Incrementally, and in order:

1. Move to live at head and build from source
2. Introduce a modern toolchain and update process
3. Switch build mode to modern language version
4. Modernize code using tools
5. Start running all tests with sanitizers
6. Start rolling out other tools to users / codebase

???
- How do you get there from an existing C++ codebase?
  - Incrementally, in the same order:
    - Move codebase to live at head, and then build from source
    - Move to a modern toolchain and modern language
    - Begin to deploy tools across codebase and workflow

---
name: faster-intro
template: title-layout

# What about faster?

???
- Previous set of advice mostly covers making C++ easier, what about faster?

---
name: faster-answers
template: basic-layout

## Making C++ faster:
- [Use idioms and patterns that are both efficient and
  fast](https://youtu.be/fHNmRkzxHWs)
- [Minimize abstractions faced by the compiler](https://youtu.be/haQ2cijhvhE)
- [Data-oriented design to fully use every cache line paid
  for](https://youtu.be/rX0ItVEVjHc)
- [Use hybrid, optimized data structures to maximize
  performance](https://youtu.be/vElZc6zSIXM)
- [Benchmark endlessly&mdash;CPUs are impossible to
  predict](https://youtu.be/nXaxk27zwlk)

???
We can just jump to the answer.

Sadly, we don't really have time to go into all the detail here.

But these are also really well covered by existing talks. To be fair, I'm
biased, as four out of five are my talks.

---
name: acknowledgments
template: basic-layout
# Acknowledgments
- Titus Winters, for Live at Head core ideas
- All the developers of the Clang and LLVM tools

---
name: questions
template: title-layout

# Questions?

.footnote[https://chandlerc.github.io/talks/root2018/root2018.html]

---
name: bonus
template: title-layout

# BONUS SLIDES!

???
Wow, you all are still here?

Ok...
---
name: halide
template: title-layout

# Check out [Halide](http://halide-lang.org/)!

.footnote[https://youtu.be/3uiEyEKji0M]
---
name: halide-example1
template: basic-layout

```
Func blur_3x3(Func input) {
  Func blur_x, blur_y;
  Var x, y, xi, yi;

  // The algorithm - no storage or order
  blur_x(x, y) = (input(x-1, y) + input(x, y) + input(x+1, y))/3;
  blur_y(x, y) = (blur_x(x, y-1) + blur_x(x, y) + blur_x(x, y+1))/3;

  // The schedule - defines order, locality; implies storage
  blur_y.tile(x, y, xi, yi, 256, 32)
        .vectorize(xi, 8).parallel(y);
  blur_x.compute_at(blur_y, x).vectorize(x, 8);

  return blur_y;
}
```
.footnote[Example from http://halide-lang.org/]
---
name: halide-example2
template: basic-layout

```
Func blur_3x3(Func input) {
  Func blur_x, blur_y;
  Var x, y, xi, yi;

  // The algorithm - no storage or order
* blur_x(x, y) = (input(x-1, y) + input(x, y) + input(x+1, y))/3;
* blur_y(x, y) = (blur_x(x, y-1) + blur_x(x, y) + blur_x(x, y+1))/3;

  // The schedule - defines order, locality; implies storage
  blur_y.tile(x, y, xi, yi, 256, 32)
        .vectorize(xi, 8).parallel(y);
  blur_x.compute_at(blur_y, x).vectorize(x, 8);

  return blur_y;
}
```
.footnote[Example from http://halide-lang.org/]
---
name: halide-example3
template: basic-layout

```
Func blur_3x3(Func input) {
  Func blur_x, blur_y;
  Var x, y, xi, yi;

  // The algorithm - no storage or order
  blur_x(x, y) = (input(x-1, y) + input(x, y) + input(x+1, y))/3;
  blur_y(x, y) = (blur_x(x, y-1) + blur_x(x, y) + blur_x(x, y+1))/3;

  // The schedule - defines order, locality; implies storage
* blur_y.tile(x, y, xi, yi, 256, 32)
        .vectorize(xi, 8).parallel(y);
  blur_x.compute_at(blur_y, x).vectorize(x, 8);

  return blur_y;
}
```
.footnote[Example from http://halide-lang.org/]
---
name: halide-example4
template: basic-layout

```
Func blur_3x3(Func input) {
  Func blur_x, blur_y;
  Var x, y, xi, yi;

  // The algorithm - no storage or order
  blur_x(x, y) = (input(x-1, y) + input(x, y) + input(x+1, y))/3;
  blur_y(x, y) = (blur_x(x, y-1) + blur_x(x, y) + blur_x(x, y+1))/3;

  // The schedule - defines order, locality; implies storage
  blur_y.tile(x, y, xi, yi, 256, 32)
*       .vectorize(xi, 8).parallel(y);
  blur_x.compute_at(blur_y, x).vectorize(x, 8);

  return blur_y;
}
```
.footnote[Example from http://halide-lang.org/]
---
name: halide-example5
template: basic-layout

```
Func blur_3x3(Func input) {
  Func blur_x, blur_y;
  Var x, y, xi, yi;

  // The algorithm - no storage or order
  blur_x(x, y) = (input(x-1, y) + input(x, y) + input(x+1, y))/3;
  blur_y(x, y) = (blur_x(x, y-1) + blur_x(x, y) + blur_x(x, y+1))/3;

  // The schedule - defines order, locality; implies storage
  blur_y.tile(x, y, xi, yi, 256, 32)
        .vectorize(xi, 8).parallel(y);
* blur_x.compute_at(blur_y, x).vectorize(x, 8);

  return blur_y;
}
```
.footnote[Example from http://halide-lang.org/]
